Understanding File Permissions and Ownership In Linux, every file and directory has three main permissions: 
●      Read (r): Permission to read the file’s content. 
●      Write (w): Permission to modify the file. 
●      Execute (x): Permission to execute a file (if it's a script or binary).




Each file and directory also has an owner and a group assigned to it. These permissions are represented as three sets of characters: 
●      Owner: The user who owns the file. 
●      Group: The group that has access to the file. 
●      Others: All users who are not the owner or part of the group.


The permissions are typically displayed as a 10-character string. For example: bash Copy code -rwxr-xr--


●      The first character indicates the file type (- for regular file, d for directory). 
●      The next three characters show the owner's permissions (read, write, execute). 
●      The next three characters show the group’s permissions. 
●      The last three characters show permissions for others.



Changing File Permissions with chmod The chmod command allows you to change the permissions of a file or directory. 

chmod [permissions] filename


Permissions can be specified in either symbolic or numeric format. 

●      Symbolic format: Use letters (r, w, x) and operators (+, -, =). 

○      + adds a permission. 
○      - removes a permission. 
○      = sets permissions exactly.


Example: Give execute permission to the owner of the file: 

chmod u+x file.txt


●      Numeric format: Permissions are represented by a three-digit number. 

○      4 represents read. 
○      2 represents write. 
○      1 represents execute. 
○      For example, 755 means: 

■      Owner: read, write, execute (7) 
■      Group: read, execute (5) 
■      Others: read, execute (5)




To set permissions to 755: 

chmod 755 file.txt


Changing Ownership with chown 
The chown command is used to change the ownership of a file or directory. 

chown owner:group filename


Example: Change the owner of file.txt to john and the group to developers: 

sudo chown john:developers file.txt


You can also change ownership recursively with the -R 

sudo chown -R john:developers /path/to/directory





